[Music]
hey this is Tom McElroy wild survival
skills calm in this video I'm going to
head out into the Sonoran Desert for a
week and document the crucial steps I
take to show you how you would live out
here in full survival alright my first
step is to get out of this area
right now I'm under full sun exposure
it's early morning so that doesn't
matter so much but before it gets to
have you know Sun right overhead I need
to get up into these canyons that I can
get some shade and potentially find some
water
okay here we go I've got my shelter this
is my favorite one because it doesn't
have any rodent material inside not much
evidence animals are using it a small
entry way that I can close off in a
fairly small cave that I can heat up
pretty easily also there's a ton of
material nearby a bunch of rocks ten
feet away in a dry streambed and so it's
not going to take me too much energy to
carry those up here and seal off this
section it's really windy today and I
bet it's going to be super windy tonight
the temperature fluctuates between 95
and 45 at night so you know I've got to
worry about the heat in the day but I
can't forget that it's going to get cold
tonight for this type of shelter to work
I don't have the insulation inside there
really isn't that much to help hold my
body heat in so I need a fire luckily
for me deserts are some of the easiest
environments to get a fire going alright
so like I said there's a dry creek bed
just down below so I've collected a
bunch of rocks got them all piled up
here so I can put this together really
quickly I just want to seal off the
entryway as I was walking up here I
already saw snakes I saw a Gila monster
so anything I can do to discourage
rodents and animals from coming in here
I also want to block the wind so I'm
going to build up the entryway close it
off as much as possible just so that I
can sneak in and out and it'll even
actually hold in some of the heat so I'm
just going to throw a bunch of rocks up
here and call it good all right so this
is a rocket science I piled up a bunch
of rocks I need to make sure it's really
sturdy try to fill in all the gaps maybe
throw a bunch of dirt in there if I had
clay I would mostly though this is going
to be a wind barrier and it's going to
help hold in a little bit of the heat
and reflect the fire light while I'm in
that shelter and with a small fire I'm
going to stay really warm in there
alright so what I've got here is the
skeleton of a saguaro cactus and in
lower areas like this where we don't
have very much agave and yucca for
making hand drill this is a fantastic
hand drill so I can break off this
skeleton one of these little ribs and
this becomes a really good handle I can
just spin one against the other and it's
going to work and get me a whole Suns
going down time to get going
what I'm going to do is just flatten out
this bigger piece of Saguaro this rib of
a saguaro plant it's going to be my fire
board
as I'm carving I'm just kind of feeling
it finding a spot that feels like it's
nice and solid not rotten or anything
like that
whole thing's pretty good and I don't
need this much okay I'm going to square
it off so it's just flat on top
90-degree edge on the side flat on
bottom and now I've got my thinner
Saguaro rib that I'm going to use for
the hand drill the drilling section of
this thing now lower ribs aren't always
perfectly round more often not they're
kind of like little rectangular and so I
think my hands can handle it but just at
the base here it's going to make sure
it's as round as possible a lot of times
I'll just take a gritty stone and just
sand it just by rubbing on the edges the
square edges you round it all out all
right next thing I'm going to do is just
point the end of this thing it's solid
piece of wood so I just point the end
put a little divot right in there and
that's my setup oh all right well it's a
tight shelter but that's the idea
there's definitely a lot of really nice
overhang out there that hopefully you
know I'm going to spend most of the time
in a day in those and just sleep in here
at night I've started to collect some
leaves and some creosote and all that
and I don't make a nice bed hopefully
we'll keep some bugs away maybe a snake
and I definitely got to stock up more
and just put in as much as I can and
just bear with the smell of the creosote
so alright I've got my hand drill
getting a little windy out there so
decided to bring it on in here last
thing you want is to make a hand drill
and then the wind comes and knocks your
your formed coal out from underneath you
and so this is the hand drill call
spindle and nice and straight and
basically to make frictions the same
thing as everything it's pressure and
speed so if I spin it really quickly
between
a hand while I'm pushing down on it
creating pressure down at the base here
that should do it
so having the right combination of
pressure and speed the right materials I
should give you a fire going so what you
can do is spin it between your hands
just get warmed up don't kill yourself
in the beginning putting all your
strength into it and eventually you're
going to push down real hard and when
you do that your hands are probably
going to go down it's smoking already
real good so that's a good sign just
going to speed up a little bit build up
the heat so I don't just kick out all
just just give it a little burst at the
end all right so I think I've burned
through my squaw rock so hopefully it's
there
still smokin just barely hanging on
though I'm not even going to touch it
who's going to let it sit for a second
just maybe fan some air into it you can
see it's just now starting to catch on
it just had a tiny spark in there I got
lucky because I burned through the
baseboard so I couldn't have gone any
further all right I'm going to make sure
all of its on this would ship really let
it grow and let it smoke on its own you
don't want to rush this part there's
plenty of time better to let that heat
and that red cold start to grow before
you throw it in your tinder bundle so
I've got on a little wood chip you'd see
it's glowing oil night I'm going to put
it right into the best part of my tinder
bundle the part that's really fluffed up
and dry hopefully the whole thing is but
there's always one little section that's
awesome I wrap it up like a bag in a
bird's nest kind of let it sit for just
a second let that heat gather and then
I'm going to blow on it I've got my fire
made behind me so I'm gonna have to do
some quick switcheroo but for the
camera's sake I'll try to hold out as
long as I can this smokes more and
Grille glows more I can blow harder
hello hey starting to burn my fingers
all right so like I said my fire pit
back here I'm just going to put it in
there just before it explodes into flame
all right taking the time hunter why
please
yeah I never had this happiness that all
right stop struggling
oh there we go huh man use my tinder
wasn't good enough early in the desert
things light up so quick and you never
know when you turn a camera on things
tend to go wrong but I thought worked
out going to be nice and cozy in here
it's really starting to take off now I
want to build it small in the beginning
make sure it's well ventilated does seem
like the draft is pulling it out that
way and just going to slowly build it
bigger try to get a hot base of coals
and eventually make a little rock wall
so that it really does vent out and
doesn't smoke up the entire shelter but
it's really having panic there for a
second it wasn't going to go here we go
a nice little fire may be able to kick
back on my bed here lay down and they
really want throughout the night is a
nice cozy warm shelter ventilating super
well and it's toasty in there I really
don't have to have a very big fire going
all right so it's definitely pretty cold
last night just now waking up and the
Sun is just getting over the horizon and
this is the time to find water I need to
make sure I don't get dehydrated water
is number one priorities that I pretty
much have to find water today or this is
over to check yourself you can pinch
this the skin on the back your hand if
it snaps back into place really well
this is not if it snaps right back to
where it was that means you're not
dehydrated but if it slowly goes back
then you're probably pretty dehydrated
so check yourself checking urine make
sure it's clear but I mean you get out
there and find some sort of water and
last night went pretty good I stayed
warm ish the problem is I fall asleep
fired kind of dimmed down and then I get
some sleep wake up have to restock it
and then just do it over and over and so
I only got a couple you know three or
four hours of sleep or something but the
ways it as it is there just isn't much
or any insulative plants out here that
don't have thorns in them so it's really
just going to be stock in a fire and
trying to sleep in between I did put hot
rocks on the fire little flat hot rocks
and I pulled them underneath me in the
middle of the night to kind of radiate
some heat up at me problem is that only
lasts like an hour hour and a half with
these rocks so I just have to switch
mouths but yeah I'll find water before
the Sun really starts coming down
all right so my best strategy at this
point to find water is to get us out of
the Lancer take your milk and find areas
where in these erroneous there's really
green areas over here we're just super
condensed green there's a lot of Palo
Verde trees or willow trees in areas
like this and that might be my best area
for getting water obviously straight
down in the middle of the desert where
it's not very green everything's kind of
pale I know that's not a good spot so
you need to head up into some of these
rodeos and try to find a really good
sort all right I scored here I've got
some clay and I can just tell by looking
at the texture of the soil and then I
kind of take it and spit on it and mash
it around and it's got good elasticity
definitely not the greatest so it might
need to be purified but from this I can
make a clay pot I can boil water
possibly even I could make a canteen so
that when I'm walking out of here I can
take water with me
this cactus here is the subject probably
the biggest survival myth on a planet
this is a barrel cactus and you've
probably been told before that if you
cut a barrel cactus open you can just
drink the water out of it it's a huge
myth it does not work one I have no idea
how in the world I'm gonna chop this in
half without an axe or a machete and two
it's full of oxalic acid when you do
finally start chewing it up and makes
your mouth pucker and it's really bad
for your system so you're not going to
get water out of the barrel cactus like
you've seen in the movies the good thing
that I can get out of this are these
fruit at this time of year this is the
one cactus that's really fruiting and so
this is going to be a staple food for me
out here but what I can do is just take
these fruits and these guys they're just
slightly early but they still taste
pretty good they have a very um kind of
sour taste to them but the yellow part
is very edible green part might just be
a little ripe right now and that's a
super good edible it doesn't have thorns
on it or glaucous or anything that you
need to worry about
so barrel cactus is one of my favorite
foods out here right now another thing
to note that when you look inside
there's a ton of seeds those actually
chew up fairly well and so you can just
eat those seeds there's proteins and
little bits of oil in there so really
good stuff for you barrel cactus is
going to be my staple and there's a ton
of it out here
all right so I've been digging holes
everywhere trying to unearth water in
these dry creek beds and I'm not really
coming up with much I just found this
puddle here it's just as one little
puddle and the bees and flies are all
over it right now
which tells me it's probably not the
greatest it might be just really
stagnant and contaminated and so last
resort I can use this and purify it what
I'm going to go do is go down the dry
creek bed just slightly and start
digging a really big hole until I hit
water I the biggest thing to remember is
that in the desert you're not always
going to find water especially in the
dry season this is post wet season so
I'm doing pretty good right now but
there's times where your only play is to
travel in the mornings and evenings and
get yourself out of the situation
because you're not going to find water
and without water in the desert you're
not going to live this for me is going
to allow me to stay here hopefully I can
find a pure source though so I'm down
the creek bed a bit and taking up with
my digging stick making a hole and I'm
starting to hit damp soil which is a
great sign that that water actually is
just traveling underground a little bit
and I can dig it out this is a really
good sign even if it doesn't work out
here because the rocks I'm sure it'll
work out in a different area so I'm
going to keep digging the problem is
once you get deeper than about 12 inches
you dig and all the sand just fills your
whole back in and so I'm just going to 5
to find a really good area where the
waters really at the surface so I'm
going to look around try to find a
low-lying area maybe with some without
as many rocks in it and do got that
water now this water doesn't just kind
of 6 12 inches underground doesn't mean
it's purified that doesn't mean it's
coming out of a spring that water can
still be contaminated and I'm going to
have to purify that I'm doing really
good set and hit water further down here
so I'm just going to dig this out it's
pretty murky
but hopefully if that settles after I've
dug then this is going to be a really
good source of water
what I need to do now to purify this
water is to boil it so what I'm going to
do is Rock boil it and some clay I don't
have time to burn out a wooden bowl
there's not much going on here I think
that didn't have the clay I might try to
go for a century plant and make a
container out of that really quick and
see if I can boil but this works really
good in a pinch and at least in the
beginning it's going to be great over
time I could see this in a pain but I've
got some of the less pure clay that I'd
dug out of the ground and super gritty
but that doesn't matter so it's great
for this type of project what I'm going
to do is just mash it up as much as I
can and I'm just going to make a dish
out of it now it hasn't been fired if
not pottery but clay still isn't very
porous and so it's going to hold water
the only thing I need to do is support
it so what I can do is dig out addition
to the ground the sides of the large
silver bowl you can see this soil is
damp too so I'm going to dig this out
put the water in here but now the
structure of this hole that I've formed
here is going to support the clay and
then the clay is going to hold the water
for long enough to boil I've had them
hold the water for a solid hour or two
before it all kind of went through so it
gives you plenty of time to make a fire
throw hot rocks in there and boil it up
so that's my plan so what I need to do
now is just make a really nice round
disc really pounded clay together and
while this stuff isn't the greatest it's
pretty good
so I'm definitely going to be attempting
some pottery later with the better stuff
and see what I can do
so once I have this disc shape I'm gonna
thin it out get it as big as possible
line this hole and then just smooth out
the inside of the clay as much as
possible so there's no cracks early all
right so what I did here was to make a
clay impression the ground I fired up a
bunch of hot rocks in the fire and I
could just take two sticks lift them out
and chuck them into this bowl I need to
raise the temperature of the water up
high enough to kill all the bacteria
that could potentially be in that water
on the safe side if you bring that water
to boiling you know you're good
while boiling it and the clay impression
was definitely worth it it was a pain
all right after digging out this hole I
looked around and found a much better
spot where there was less rocks
interfering and I was able to dig out a
nice well that I could come back to
every day
so having a canteen would be absolutely
amazing out here in order to do that I
can't just use this raw egg to make a
pot probably won't work for something
super fancy and I don't want to take any
chances so I'm going to grind up this
clay and purify it and then I can make
something really nice out of it
my routine every day was to go out into
the desert collect and gather as many
things as I needed during the hottest
part of the day expended hiding out in
this overhang the first few days this
mint purifying its color cut alright so
most people will tell you to grind up
pottery and either purified by letting
in water settle which takes another
bucket and a lot of time or to grind it
up put it on a big cloth and then let
the wind kind of winnow away the finest
particles because they blow a little
further than the heavier thing that's
all those other things take way too long
I just don't have time for either one so
what I'm doing is just grinding it up as
much as possible picking out the
obviously really big pieces but then I
can put it on my shirt kind of bounce it
around and when I do that you can see
already how many of the big pieces and
the whole fiber pieces come to the top
from here I can scrape away all the
bigger stones just do it again and again
now you don't need to get everything but
you do want to have a consistent size of
particle in there to make a clay pot you
don't need 100% pure clay you just need
all the material to be about the same
size with no materials that are going to
blow up or crack or anything like that
so getting rid of some of the bigger
pieces and that's really going to help
so I don't have any big rocks in there
that are definitely going to make it
break before putting all the work in to
purifying I wanted to test the clay so I
pinched together a couple tiny little
pots and threw them into the fire well
most of them did crack a little bit it
shows that the clay is great potential
all right so I'm going to set up my
figure-four trap is a deadfall I've
jammed some wolf berries into the bait
stick I've got my rock here and there's
a bunch of rodents Scott around here so
I'm thinking this is a good spot to trap
lots of tracks right there we go it's
all set up looks like a little figure
four once the animal comes in and
touches this bait stick hopefully
doesn't take much but I really have to
set it in between a point where all this
wind isn't going to blow it over and set
it versus it needs to be sensitive
enough of the animal so hopefully that's
the middle ground that I'm compromising
on I'm going to disguise my trail camera
in right about here and hopefully that
will do it
you
all right so come up this morning and I
looked at the trap and it looks like
they're women taking in it maybe it just
sprung but then I thought little Hales
digging outside so let's check this guy
buddy he's gotten some scraps of the
gears are all cut up
order to clean this animal really the
big thing is you want to remove the skin
and you want to remove the guts
everything else is just bones and meat
if your knife just underneath the skin
and pull up without ever cutting into
the abdominal cavity you're going to cut
straight up the belly up the inside of
each leg and then you can peel the skin
back surprisingly this game comes off
pretty easily and just pull the arms
through and pull it all the way off the
head
all right admittedly I'm doing a little
bit of a sloppy job gutting this animal
but I had a few open cuts on my hands
and the last thing I wanted was to
become blood brothers with a packrat
all right I got this animal what I'm
going to do is pinch the abdominal
muscle I'm going to cut just the
abdominal muscle and slide by knife
under it without puncturing the guts
it's hugely important that you never
puncture the intestines because I could
easily spoiling your meat and make you
stick from here I continue cutting up
through the rib cage all the way up to
the neck I can cut the head off at this
point my knife the other way down around
the groin and around the anus and pull
the guts out and then in one package now
I'm left with just meat and bones and I
can stick that right over the fire
I like in any survival situation you end
up collecting so much stuff that you
can't possibly just carry it all around
in your arms so I'm going to make a
basket out of this so tall plant the
great plant to know not only does it
make a great basket but the stock on it
is fantastic for making friction fires
all right so I've collected a bunch of
Soto leaves I removed all the thorns
from the outside you know went pretty
quickly and I probably could've done it
with my fingernails if I didn't have a
knife and what I'm going to do right now
is make a plated basket where it's
something you probably did it a kid with
popsicle sticks to lock them together in
a square and I'm just going to fold up
the ends and keep going under over under
over and it should make a really strong
basket of these leaves are almost
unbreakable alright to make this kind of
basket again it's super simple all I
need to do is start off with a few and
then build out from there but right now
I'm just building the base this is going
to be a square basket and so if I take
start three by three and I'll match one
up in the middle so that goes over under
over the next one I'm going to go under
over under okay just like that
and then the next one's going to go back
to over under over and just by doing
that we all know lock these things
together now as I build out I can either
kind of make it you know rectangular or
perfectly square totally up to you and
so again next one here it's going to go
the opposite of the last one they're
going to get a little mess up you just
pull them back together makes a real
nice strong base for this basket
you
all right as I said that's super super
simple just a bunch of under overs you
can make it rectangular or perfectly
square that part's entirely up to you
all I'm going to do now is fold up these
ends at a 90 degree angle and I'm going
to weave around with other soda leaves
so that it goes under over under over
all around the basket all right so by
oxygen I thought I'd crossed record and
it didn't so I missed a little segment
there but you'll get the idea basically
you know here's the base that I started
with from there I turned up at a 90
degree angle with all these spokes the
ones that were originally six count and
I wove in sideways going around one
layer per leaf that go all the way
around and then the next one up if it
was started where it was weaving under
over under over throughout the spokes
the next layer up is going to start
litter over under over so they vary
every time I go up a layer and that's
what locks it in place and keeps the
basket together kind of you know common
sense right now what I'm doing is just
tucking in the rim and you know this is
a pretty good sized basket I definitely
got a lot of other things to do so I'm
not going to keep going and make it much
bigger clock's ticking I got things to
do so I'm going to call it here it was a
great bath it feels really sturdy and
it's going to be a huge help then I'll
have to carry everything in my arms
anymore
all right so this is the Choya plant and
right now there's a ton of buds coming
off of these things for the Native
Americans of the Sonoran Desert this is
one of the staples to their diet and
even though it looks really scary it's
got tons of thorns on it it's not that
hard to process and you get a lot of
food out of it so and it actually tastes
really good so what I need to do is pull
these buds off of here collect a bunch
of them and then I just kind of roast
them over the fire and they're good to
go before I do that I need to make a
pair of tongs because up until this
point I've just been using two sticks
and fumbling around with it kind of a
pain so it's going to quickly show you
how I'm going to make a pair of tongs
and then go around and just fill up on
these Choya bug there we have it nice
pair of tongs this is going to help a
lot instead of trying to fumble with two
sticks like it happened I just walk
right up grab them I got a big bud right
there all right the middle of the day
I'm avoiding the Sun is also a huge
rainstorm out there so it seems like a
perfect kind of the processes join a bug
so what I'm doing is taking them from my
basket here I got about a little more
than half full from about 10 or 15
minutes of collecting and you look at
these things and you think there's no
way you would ever want to touch them or
eat them but they're actually fantastic
and what you can do
take a couple thrown on a flat rock like
this so you just roll them around and a
lot of the thorns are going to pop off
if not you're going to get rid of the
sharp tips on the thorn so they just
don't hurt as bad okay
you know there is a certain point where
it doesn't do as much but do little
circles and then from there once the
storms are kind of taking off it's not
that bad you can actually touch it and
it really doesn't get you you need to
remember any time you eat anything
kakasii is that they don't just have big
thorns that have these microscopic
little thorns and clusters that we
galapiat so I need to make sure to get
in there and get all those clauses out
but I'm just going to come in here and
slowly kind of just have a nice relaxed
couple hours in here
and pick off a bunch of these thorns
each one of these may take 45 seconds to
a minute so for this side you know
imagine in one hour you have 60 to 80 of
these things and it'd be a really good
meal so the energy that you put into
this you gain ten times as much back by
eating them so absolutely love these
things and you should definitely learn
them and process them when you're out in
the desert here's another great edible
plant that's out here again covered in
thorns and this is the prickly pear it's
got really big thorns coming off of it
doesn't look very inviting and it also
has all those little glocken my
experience with blockage don't cook out
very well in a fire and so I like to
make sure to scrape them all out cut
them out remove them and it just takes a
lot of time but it is a good survival
food it's good to know it's very easily
identifiable and you're not going to
mess up so what I'll do is just get my
tongs and I'll start scraping all these
thorns away I need to remember not to
ever walk here again in my bare feet but
if I just scratch along the surface a
lot of these bigger storms are going to
start breaking off alright get the edge
like thorn 400 by now anyway you can see
how all those big thorns broke off and
at the base of each one of those thorns
are a bunch of tiny little irritating
little like kind of you call them thorns
but they're no good you need to cut
those out or scrape the heck out of them
with your knife or on a rock but those
need to be totally gone and then I'm
going to cut around to the edge then ice
pry this up on a fire and I can eat it
again not my favorite edible plant but a
really good survival food to know
alright so here we go I got the joy of
buds clicking on
sigh right here they're just kind of
sitting right on a not super hot bed of
coals and I'm just kind of keeping them
from burning turning them over but
making sure those Glock is get really
cooked these things are delicious I love
them
prickly pear kind of the opposite I'm
making sure it's over some really hot
coals under the care of it burns a
little bit as long as all of those
blockages are singed little rat guy is
on the stick that I you know put a
couple sticks through his abdomen area
just so he doesn't flip over I just
slowly turn them with something like
this you want to make sure that you
don't just have it on fire you don't
want to just singe and burn me just have
it on over a hot bed of coals and this
is going to be great occasionally I turn
it and the big thing with this guy is
that I want to make sure it's extremely
well done
you know I know medium rare rare meats
much better but if you're in a survival
situation cook everything really
thoroughly don't take a chance that
you're going to get some sort of food
poisoning all right it's the moment of
truth everything's cooked and I let it
cool off a little bit and it's just
ready to go for the taste test I'm
excited
tons of food my energy has been great
for this entire trip so far and I'm no
doubt with all these edible plants that
it's going to be fairly easy to get
enough calories during this trip so
let's start off with the soya stick a
quick look make sure that I don't see
Glock is or any things that's going to
stab me I eat these all the time I've
never had a problem but every time I'm
just a little bit paranoid about it and
just make sure last thing I want is a
mouthful of splinters but this is one of
my favorite foods this is something you
would eat at home it's fantastic tastes
like asparagus heads so really good
stuff alright we've got the thumbs up go
to pound those eat as many of those as I
can possibly process the rest of the
time here so those are already good to
go prickly pear now it's not good Oh her
color here
is your survival food it's going to keep
you going
cooked over campfire just doesn't taste
that good but it's good I'm it's fine if
you're in survival you're starving to
death you unit and then last but not
least there we go
the one I'm real excited about the bust
off is back leg is really well cooked
just want to make sure no uncooked
portions in there the last thing you
want and just pull off sections of meat
from his leg looks real good there you
go oh it's fantastic you know once you
get over the fact of what you're eating
meat to me it all tastes the same so
it's going to be a great meal really
excited Suns going down right now the
winds starting to pick up it's starting
to get cold so I'm going to down a bunch
of this food along with the barrel
cactus fruits that I've been eating and
transfer some of these coals into my
shelter and go to bed
but great day great food got some big
projects to work on in the morning so
I'm excited for that alright this is the
end of part 1 part 2 is up on my YouTube
page so check it out